                                   _________________________
                                  |  HOSTELS ON THE CAMPUS  |
                                  |_________________________|


A hostel is a home away from home. Aware of the special needs and requirements of students,
who come from far-flung places to this centre of learning, the Panjab University tries to provide them a
safe, secure and affordable accommodation.

There are eight Residence Halls for students on the campus, 4 for boys, 4 for Girls. 

These Halls, which accommodate approximately 7000 students, are named after eminent men and women,
historical personalities and personages: Mehar Chand Mahajan, G.C. Chatterji,Shanti Swaroop Bhatnagar, 
Vallabh Bhai Patel, Lala Lajpat Rai, Justice Teja Singh Samundari, Swami Vivekananda, & Baba Banda Singh Bahadur
who played an important role in shaping the destiny of world and left footprints on
the sands of time.

The University Hostels take pains to give their students a neat and clean environment and a
comfortable place to live in. There are Wardens/Hostel Staff on duty round the clock. Each hostel has a
dining hall, canteen, several desert and water coolers, a visitors' lounge, and invariably an outdoor court
for badminton, volley ball etc. The mess provides a balanced diet at reasonable rates. The Common Room
is fairly well equipped with current magazines and newspapers. There is provision for indoor games, LED
TV and music system. Internet connectivity through wi-fi has been provided in each hostel.

Architecturally, the hostels are aesthetically laid out with plenty of open space and a lot of
greenery. The rooms are comfortable, fitted with fans, lights and hard furniture. Each wing of the hostel has
several verandahs and balconies.

Comforts are important but they alone are not enough. Man is a social animal and needs to
interact with others. The resident students are encouraged to participate in cultural and social activities.
Colorful evenings of song and dance are not unusual on the campus. Talent shows, dramatics and literary
events are organized from time to time. The inmates of a hostel are encouraged to live in harmony, like one
big family, lending each other a helping hand whenever required, mutually cooperating to make hostel life
a rich and fruitful experience.

There is no doubt that during these formative years in the hostel, life-long bonds are created and
friendships cemented. This is a time, which will stand out in the memory as a golden period. University
experience is an important milestone in an individual's life, the stepping-stone to an adult life of responsibility and care. The hostels of Panjab University try to provide an ideal atmosphere for a healthy, all round
development of personality and a launch pad for a glorious career ahead.
Living in a hostel presupposes high degree of integrity, consciousness, cooperation, tolerance
and hard work for a bright future and good image of our institution.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                    RULES FOR THE RESIDENT STUDENTS
                                    _______________________________


(Effective from the 1st day of opening of the University after the summer vacation)
(SUBJECT TO THE AMENDMENTS AS APPROVED BY UNIVERSITY BODY)
                     
                                          General Rules
                                          -------------

Admission:

1. All rights of admission to the University hostels are reserved with the Dean Student Welfare. No
student can claim admission as a right.

2. ORDERS/DECISIONS NOTIFIED FROM TIME TO TIME, BY DEAN STUDENTWELFARE/
WARDEN, WILL BE BINDING ON THE RESIDENTS.

3. (a) Admission of the students to the University hostels will be made by the Chairpersons of the
respective Teaching Departments. The students are required to submit to the department concerned, forms for admission to the hostel within 3 days from the date of admission in the Department, for allocation of hostel accommodation, after when his/her seat in the hostel shall stand
forfeited and will be allotted to the next student in the waiting list.
(b) In case a student shifts from one Department to another, his/her seat in the Hostel shall be
cancelled by the Chairperson of the Department with intimation to the concerned hostel Warden.
He/She shall apply afresh for hostel accommodation in the Department where he/she is admitted.

4. Admission shall be sought afresh in the beginning of every academic session. A student may be
refused admission if his/her conduct during his/her earlier stay in any of the hostels was not
satisfactory or he/she was a defaulter.

5. Any student alleged to be involved in any misconduct will be liable to be suspended from the
University and on proving the commission of misconduct the student shall be liable to be expelled from the University. The student aggrieved from the decision of the University shall be
entitled to appeal to a Standing Committee to be constituted for the purpose by the Vice-Chancellor, of which a retired High Court Judge shall be the Chairperson.

6. Once a student has indulged in mis-conduct of any manner whatsoever on the University Campus and action has been taken against him/her, he/she shall not be entitled to take admission in
any Department of the University and for this purpose a separate web-site shall be created by the
University so that the Head of the Department while granting admission is able to check whether
the student seeking admission is entitled to admission on account of his previous mis-conduct.
The Head of the Department shall check the web-site before granting admission and shall give a
certificate on the admission form to that effect.

7. Day scholars residing within 40 kms distance (including those coming from Mohali, Sohana,
Kharar, Kurali, Panchkula, Pinjore, Kalka, Derabassi, Zirakpur etc.), students studying in the
evening classes (except final year law students who are not in any service/profession/occupation), students of part-time courses and correspondence courses, Diploma/Certificate courses
upto one year duration, college students and employees are not eligible for admission to the
hostels. In case a student, after being admitted to the hostel, shifts to the evening class or joins
service/profession or ceases to be a student of the dept., or ceases to be eligible for hostel
accommodation, he or she will have to vacate the hostel within 3 days from the date he or she
becomes ineligible.

8. No student can seek admission to more than one hostel during an academic session.

9. An incorrect statement/address filled by the student in the hostel admission form would result in
cancellation of admission and confiscation of securities.

10. (a) Students who, after passing one professional course, seek admission in a non-professional
postgraduate degree course, shall not be considered for allotment of Hostel accommodation.
(b) No student will be permitted to stay in the hostel who has completed his/her post-graduation in
one subject (e.g. a student after completing one M.A. from any University and seeking admission
in another M.A. shall not be entitled for hostel accommodation). In other words, hostel accommodation for parallel course will not be permitted. Students seeking admission in vertical courses
will only be entitled for hostel accommodation (e.g. student after completing B.Sc. can seek
hostel in M.Sc., M.Phil, Ph.D. or student after completing LL.B. can seek hostel in LL.M and
Ph.D.)

11. (a) Any student, who has not cleared (dropped/failed) his examination, will not be entitled to the
hostel facility in future. Information has to be sent by concerned Chairperson to the Warden.
(b) Any student who is not promoted to the next class will not be eligible for hostel accommodation.
(c) Students securing less than 50% marks will be given hostel accommodation, subject to its availability, only.

12. A person who is in employment, in profession or in any other whole-time occupation other than
in status for the course for which he has sought admission in the University shall not be entitled
to hostel accommodation.

13. Only a bonafide student will be permitted to avail hostel facility and for that purpose the Warden
concerned will send a list of the residents of a particular Department for verification by the Head
of the Department every semester.

14. The hostels (including messes/canteens and common rooms) shall remain closed during the summer
vacation for a period as specified by the D.S.W. The residents will vacate the hostel rooms within
3 days of their last paper. In case the room is still not vacated, it will be locked by the hostel
authorities till the possession of the room is handed over/taken over and a minimum fine of Rs.
1000/- shall be imposed in addition to payment of daily charges for stay without permission from
the Warden.

15. (a) Research Scholars, M.Phil., M.A., M.Ed., M.Sc., M.Tech, MCA and LL.M. students, who have to
continue their projects, dissertations etc. may be permitted to stay in the hostels during the
summer vacation on the specific recommendation of the Chairpersons and Supervisors.
(b) The residents of on-going classes who are to undertake summer training/summer placements/
internship as a part of their course requirement during the summer vacation can stay in the Hostel
on normal room rent on production of a certificate to that effect from their respective Chairpersons. However, they will be required to seek admission to the Hostel afresh on the reopening of
the University after summer vacation as per the normal practice.

16. Residents shall see the DSW/Warden in the Office during the fixed hours only. In case of emergency, the Chowkidar on duty may be sent to the DSW's/Warden's residence.

17. All bona fide students will be considered for Hostel accommodation only for the duration of their
respective courses of study. However, the extension, if any, can be granted on the basis of valid
reasons duly supported with documents and recommendation of the Chairperson of the concerned Department. Such extension may be granted by the D.S.W. on daily charges.

18. Late admission to the hostel shall be subject to the prior permission of the DSW. Late admission
means any admission after the last date of admission in the University as specified by the
University from time to time.
Note: Sports Persons up to Grading 'B', on the availability of accommodation, will be given preference
for hostel accommodation.

19. Research Students:
(a) The hostel accommodation to Ph.D. Research Scholars will be allotted for a period of 2 years from
the date of their registration initially extendable upto 3 years on the approval of grant of extension
in their Ph.D. programme by the competent body/authority.
(b) Research Scholars who fail to complete their pre-Ph.D. course work and do not submit their
synopsis within the stipulated time frame will be asked to vacate the hostel with immediate effect.
(c) The Ph.D. students will have to submit an affidavit duly forwarded by the Chairperson of the
concerned Department that the Ph.D. student is working for full time and not doing any kind of
job or side business and the scholar actually needs the hostel accommodation to pursue the
research work.
(d) The research scholars will have to submit the proceedings of RMC/RAC stating satisfactory 6
monthly progress through the supervisor, duly attested by the Chairperson of the Department to
the Warden concerned.
(e) All M.Phil. students seeking hostel accommodation shall be provided the same on sharing basis
only.
(f) (I) Those Research Scholars who are getting house rent or are entitled for house rent will pay
the amount to which they are so entitled to the hostel as rent if they wish to stay in the hostel.
(II) Research Scholars who are getting fellowships and are paying the rent equivalent to the
house rent claimed by her/him can pay their rent on monthly basis.
(g) Research Scholars shall vacate the hostel within 3 days of submission of their thesis/dissertation. Research Scholars shall ordinarily not be entitled to stay in the hostel after the submission
of thesis. However, if a Research Scholar is getting fellowship, he/she will be allowed to stay in
the hostel till the completion of viva voce examination. Total period of stay must not be more than
5 years from the date of registration.
(h) Extension of stay to Research Scholars, M.Phil., LL.M. for writing dissertation will be subject to
the production of extension letter from appropriate authority to that effect, clearly stating the
period of extension.
(i) Students joining Research leading to Ph.D. degree must attach a copy of "Research Visa"
before he/she is admitted in hostel.5
(j) Students engaged in any trade/profession/service/registered with Bar Council of India for pursuing law practice in Courts are not entitled for Hostel accommodation.
(k) Only those Research Scholars will be entitled to hostel facility who are working under the supervision of faculty from Panjab University Campus Departments/Centres or drawing fellowship
through the University and are working whole time in the University Department.
(l) Out station Panjab University Research students who are attending course work at the campus
may be allowed temporary stay in the hostel on daily basis subject to the availability of rooms.
Responsibilities
Living in a hostel pre-supposes a high degree of integrity and consciousness as a member of a community.
It entails a moral responsibility upon a resident to:
(i) see that no damage is done to the hostel property.
(ii) make every effort for peaceful co-existence maintaining the decorum, and
(iii) observe all hostel rules meticulously in letter and spirit.
Any violation of rules and directions will be subject to strict disciplinary action, which in extreme
case/s may lead to expulsions, forfeiture of the securities of such resident/s and his/her right to future
admission. All residents of hostels in whatever capacity they may be staying in the hostel shall be bound
to observe hostel rules and shall be liable to fine or other disciplinary action for any violation of hostel
rules similar to that of regular student residents.

20. Residents should be properly dressed while going to common room, dining hall or hostel office/
functions, failing which it will be considered an offence and a fine may be imposed as decided by
the Warden.

21. Residents should not keep cash or jewellery or other valuables in their rooms. The risks and
responsibility for the safety of their belongings including Mobile Sets/Laptop/Desktop/Audio
system/vehicles will be entirely that of the residents. Residents are advised to take an insurance
policy against theft and fire. Use of strong and reliable lock is recommended.

22. If an outsider is found illegally living in the room of a resident, the resident shall be liable to (a)
expulsion from the hostel; (b) forfeiture of securities; (c) a fine of minimum of Rs. 1000/-; (d) daily
charges from the date of illegal occupation of the room to be determined by the Warden and (e) be
debarred from seeking admission in any of the University hostels and this will be communicated
to his/ her parents/guardian.

23. In case of non-payment of dues in time or violation of any hostel rule by a resident, the Warden
may get his/her room locked or opened for possession without any liability whatsoever. The
belongings shall be transferred to the store. If the dues are not cleared within 3 months of the
taking of possession of the room, the belongings may be auctioned and the proceeds adjusted
against the payment of the hostel after one year.

24. Every resident shall be responsible for the safety of the furniture/other articles given to him/her.
Furniture is neither to be removed from one room to another nor be carelessly kept outside the
room to be exposed to damage. Anybody indulging in this practice will be liable to a disciplinary
action (including fine of minimum Rs.200/- per article).

25. (a) No vehicle without stickers, issued by the Warden & DSW Office, should be permitted to be
parked in the hostels. Registration of vehicle should be in the name of resident/parents of resident.6
(b) The residents shall park their cycles/motor vehicles in the designated Parking Area of the hostel
on payment of the prescribed parking fee. Parking of vehicle by resident should be proper &
should not block the entrance of hostel, nor movement of other vehicles. Defaulters will be fined
a minimum of Rs.500/- per default and tow away charges of Rs. 300 in additions to normal charges.
(c) Registration number of the vehicles of the residents must be entered in the register with the
Chowkidar of the hostel failing which a fine would be imposed. Vehicles of guest will not be
allowed to be parked inside the hostel.

26. THE HOSTELWILL NOT BE RESPONSIBLE FOR ANYTHEFT, DAMAGE AND LOSS OF A
VEHICLE/MOBILE SET/DESKTOP/LAPTOP/COMPUTER/ AUDIO/VIDEO SYSTEM ETC.
THE RESIDENTS ARE ADVISED TO GETTHEIR VECHICLES/DESKTOP/LAPTOP INSURED
AGAINST LOSS, THEFTAND FIRE.

27. AS PER SUPREME COURT RULING SMOKING AT PUBLIC PLACES IS A PUNISHABLE OFFENCE. Smoking is strictly prohibited in the hostels including Mess Canteen Areas. Defaulters
will be fined Rs.500/- per offence.

28. In order to curb the drug menace in the hostels, those found indulging in taking intoxicants,
drugs and any such banned materials shall be expelled straightway from the hostel. They shall
not be given admission in any other hostel in future.

29. THE TELEPHONE IS MEANT FOR OFFICE USE ONLY.
In case of emergency the residents may use the phone (on prescribed charges) after making
proper entries in the register meant for the purpose. Any resident misusing the telephone shall be
fined upto Rs. 100/-.

30. Acts of indiscipline, misbehaviour, gambling, use of intoxicants in the hostel premises including
rooms shall be severely dealt with. A resident guilty of any of these shall be liable to expulsion or
a minimum fine of Rs. 500/- or both. Any resident found in possession of any weapon shall be
liable to minimum fine of Rs. 2000/- and/or expulsion and the matter shall be reported to the Police.
Further the DSW/ Warden(s) may send the case of a resident who commits such an act for
disciplinary action to the Chairperson concerned & parents shall be informed.
Note: ALL ROOMS (INCLUDING ALMIRAHS AND BELONGINGS) CAN BE OPENED FOR INSPECTION BYTHE DSW/WARDEN(S) AT ANYTIME OF THE DAY.

31. Any student opening a room by breaking the hostel lock or seal or window-panes etc. shall be
liable to a minimum fine of Rs. 500/-. In case this kind of conduct is repeated, students will be liable
for expulsion from the hostel.

32. Roll number for any examination will not be issued to the resident student unless he/she produces a "No Objection Certificate" from his/her respective Hostel.

33. Before leaving the hostel, every resident shall obtain clearance from the Warden and personally
hand over the charge of the room and hostel property to the Chowkidar on duty. The resident will
be fully responsible for any damage/loss of property. Repair charges for any damage to the
furniture will have to be paid by the resident along with a minimum penalty of Rs. 500/- for not
handing over the charge.
Note: a) Maximum fine levied by any Warden for one episode of mis-conduct shall not exceed Rs. 2500/-. A
fine exceeding Rs. 2500, may be levied with the prior permission of DSW.7
b) It will be obligatory for the parents of the residents to meet the respective Wardens at least twice
a year and a record of the same be maintained in the concerned Hostel. It will also be obligatory
for the local guardian/parents of the residents to attend to him/her at the time of sickness/
emergency.
(c) AS PER THE ORDERS OF THE HON'BLE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA, RAGGING IS
STRICTLY BANNED IN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS. THE STUDENTS FOUND INDULGED
IN RAGGING SHALL BE SUSPENDED AND EXPELLED FROM THE INSTITUTION ON PROVING THE CHARGES.
Committees

34. For the proper democratic functioning of the hostels, several committees such as, Common Room
Committee, Mess Committee, Canteen Committee etc., will be formed in each hostel by 31st
August of every year. The committees will work closely in full cooperation and coordination with
the Warden to enhance the image of each hostel. These committees may also make suggestions
to the Administration for further improvement in the hostels and ensure the proper discipline and
decorum. Every hostel will have block prefects (one from each block of hostel) who will be
entrusted with the responsibility of ensuring cleanliness and up-keep/maintenance of essential
services and infrastructure of the respective block.
Allotment

35. (a) Rooms will be allotted by the Warden according to the plan prepared by the DSW/Warden(s)
(b) All students will be provided hostel accommodation on sharing basis only.
(c) All M.Phil. students seeking hostel accommodation will be provided the same on sharing basis
only.
(d) A dormitory will not be allotted to a single person even on full payment. If one of the residents of
the dormitory leaves, either another resident will be put in that dormitory or the resident will be
moved to a cubicle, if available.
(e) A resident cannot shift from his/her allotted room to another room within the hostel without the
permission of the Warden. Defaulters will be fined minimum Rs. 500/-.
(f) Residents shall keep the hostel identity cards, duly attested by the Warden, with them and will
present these on demand by the authorities. The card should be carefully preserved, as no
duplicate card will normally be issued. In case of loss, it may be re-issued on payment of Rs. 100/-.
Lamination of the Hostel Identity Cards shall be done to avoid its misuse. The residents while
leaving the hostel at the end of the academic year or in the mid session must return the Card to the
office of the Warden failing which the resident will have to pay Rs. 100/- before the securities are
refunded.
(g) Any person who is a defaulter of hostel dues shall not be eligible for hostel admission till he or
she produces no dues certificate from the concerned Hostel Warden.
Visitors and Guests
36. (a) Male visitors may see residents of the Girls' hostel, if need be, only in the Visitors' Room during
specified hours.
 (b) Female visitors shall not visit the rooms of boys hostels; they can visit male residents, if need be,
in the Visitors' Room upto 8 p.m.8
(c) A register will be maintained at the reception of each hostel to regulate outsiders' entry.
(d) As a rule, guests are not permitted to stay overnight in any hostel. However, one guest may be
accommodated by the residents in his/her room for a maximum period of 3 days in a month in a
particular hostel on guest charges i.e. Rs. 25/- per day. No Guest is allowed to stay in a Hostel
without the prior permission of the Warden. The name of the Guest must be entered in the Guests
Register with the Chowkidar with the prior permission of the Warden. Such guest will stay with
the resident. In case the guest is staying in the guest room, the charges shall be Rs. 100/- per day.
Guest entry must be made before 10.00 p.m. No guest will be allowed to enter in the hostels after
10.00 p.m. Defaulters will have to pay fine as per rule.
(e) Any resident having a guest without prior permission of the Warden and proper entry in guest
register will be liable to minimum fine of Rs. 300/- and disciplinary action, in addition to the guest
charges. Entry in the guest register maintained in the Hostel is mandatory by the resident.
Residents not obeying this may lead to fine or/and expulsion from the hostel.
(f) If any outsider is found staying illegally without the prior permission of the Warden/DSW, the
Warden concerned shall also be accountable for it.
(g) Any University Teacher may be permitted to stay in the hostel temporarily on payment of daily
charges by the Dean Student Welfare after due recommendation from the Chairperson.
(h) In case of temporary allotment, daily charges will be levied and refundable Security equal to
amount as charged from regular student must be deposited with the office.
Attendance and Leave
37. General
(a) Senate in its meeting dated 8.4.2019 approved as under:
1. No fine for late entry and absentee shall be imposed on the hostels residents Attendance is
must between 9.00 p.m. to 10.00 p.m. If a resident does not come for attendance, then written
warnings will be issued by the concerned Warden for two times, after which defaulter will be
expelled from hostel.
2. Identity Card of the Hostel is mandatory for the residents while entering details in the
mobility register for late night exit/entry.
3. For movement outside the hostel after 10.00 p.m., the entry in the mobility register is must for
all residents. If residents do not make entry in mobility register, written warnings will be
issued by the concerned Warden. More than two defaults will lead to expulsion from hostels.
4. Guest entry must be made before 10.00 p.m. No guest will be allowed to enter in the hostels
after 10.00 p.m. Defaulters will have to pay fine as per rule.
5. Only two gates will be opened after 10.00 p.m. i.e. Main Gate Near Girls Hostel No. 6 will be
opened for residents of Girls Hostel No.3,4 &6 and Gate of Girls Hostel No.7 for residents of
Girls Hostel No. 5 & 7. Hostel Gate of Girls Hostel No.5 will be closed at night after 10.00 p.m.
All the residents should exit and enter from these two gates only, due to shortage of security
staff and for maintaining proper record.
(b) Residents returning from home must report themselves before the attendance time. Violators will
be fined as decided by the Warden.9
Food

38. (a) Hostels have facilities for lunch and dinner as well as Canteen services. A resident shall have
meals in the hostel mess/canteen only. It is mandatory for every resident to open their mess and
canteen account in respective hostel at the time of taking hostel admission. Defaulters will be
fined.
(b) Residents will not enter the cooking area.
(c) All complaints requiring immediate action of the Warden should be made in writing through a
member of the Mess/Canteen Committee.
(d) Facilities for cooperative and contract messes are available in the hostel. A cooperative mess will
be started with a minimum strength of 70 members and each member of the cooperative mess shall
pay an advance of Rs. 2000/-, which will be adjusted against his last bill of the session. The
Secretary of the cooperative mess shall screen the enrolment of members and any defaulter with
regard to the mess dues shall be the sole responsibility of the cooperative mess. Advance for not
more than one month will be given for running the cooperative mess at a given time. Every
member will have to give an undertaking that he will shoulder the responsibilities and observe the
rules of cooperative mess. A resident changing from one mess to the other mess will have to clear
the account of the first mess before being allowed by the Warden, in writing. The change will be
allowed only from 1st of the month.
(e) Ordinarily residents will take food in the hostels. The residents are required to take at least 15
diets per month failing which a minimum charge of 15 diets is to be paid by them (10 diets to be
paid to the contractors and 5 diets towards the Mess Development Fund) in the messes where
they are residing. In exceptional cases, the DSW/Warden may give permission for lodging only.
Such residents shall pay two diet charges per month (one each towards mess & canteen) as
amenity charges in addition to the usual fee.
(f) Guests, with the permission of the Warden, may be served meals on a surcharge of Rs. 3/- per diet.
Fifty per cent of the surcharge shall be deposited in the Mess Account and the remaining fifty per
cent shall be paid to the mess contractor. No resident is allowed to have more than 40 guest diets
in a month.
(g) It will be obligatory on the part of the residents to inform the contractors/Cooperative Mess
Secretary/ Wardens before hand if they want to miss a meal so as to avoid the wastage and loss.
To miss lunch /dinner the residents must mention in the register meant for the purpose at least 8
hours in advance.
(h) Cooking in the rooms is strictly prohibited and defaulters will be fined a minimum of Rs. 300/- each
time for a default, in addition to the fine for use of a heater, if any, and its confiscation.
(i) No meals will be served in the rooms except in cases of illness or any other justified reason and
that too with the permission of the Warden. Residents as well as contractors will be fined Rs. 100/-
for violating this rule each time. Meals should be taken only in Dining Hall.
(j) Complaints, if any, against the conduct of the contractors/servants may be made by the residents
to the Warden in writing. No complaint about mess/canteen etc. shall be entertained if the complainant himself/herself is a defaulter.
(k) A resident of the hostel cannot take his/her meals as a guest of another resident of the same
hostel.10
(l) Messes, Canteens and Common Rooms will remain closed after 2.00 p.m. on the following days:
Republic Day
Holi
Independence Day
Inaugural Function Day
Gandhi Jayanti
Dussehra
Diwali
Guru Nanak Dev's Birthday
Christmas Day
Hostel Annual Day
(m) Each resident will contribute Rs. 100/- p.m. as service charges in the mess and canteen respectively. (*Subject to introduction of labour laws.)
Food Subsidy/Scholarships

39. (a) At the beginning of the session, applications will be invited from the needy and really deserving
resident students for the award of food subsidy.
(b) The concession will be discontinued if and when the recipient violates any of the hostel rules.
(c) A resident, who is defaulter or have any record of misconduct in the University hostel, is not
eligible for any kind of food subsidy/ financial assistance/scholarships.
(d) The recipients of the concession will be bound to do some duty/work in the hostel as may be
assigned by the Warden.
(e) The office of the DSW is providing following subsidies/financial assistance/scholarships to the
Campus students:-
1. Need Based Assistance, Need-cum-Merit and Differently Abled Scholarship: These scholarships are paid for nine months in a year to the Panjab University Campus students recommended by the Chairpersons on the basis of conditions laid down for the award out of
"Students Scholarship Fund".
2. Sports Scholarship: This scholarship is awarded on the basis of the grading done by the
Sports Department based on the performance of P.U. Campus students in various sports
activities. This scholarship is paid for nine months in a year out of "Students Scholarship
Fund".
3. Extra-Mural Activities Scholarship: This scholarship is paid out of the "Amalgamated Fund".
The performance of the campus students in various Extra-Mural activities like debates,
seminars, one act plays etc. is the deciding factor for award of this scholarship. This scholarship is a fixed amount to be decided by the Vice-Chancellor on the recommendations of the
Committee.
4. Financial Assistance: Financial assistance is paid out of "Poor Students Welfare Fund" to the
Panjab University Hostel residents.11
Electricity

40. (a) Residents are not allowed to use more than one electric bulb (upto 100 W), fluorescent tubes etc.
They must switch off the light/fan while going out of the rooms. The defaulters will be fined a
minimum of Rs. 50/- for each offence.
(b) Residents are not permitted to use/keep any kind of electric/electronics appliances such as
electric iron, heaters, air conditioners, induction cook tops, electric rods, table fans, T.V. etc. in
their rooms. Defaulters will be fined a minimum of Rs. 1000/- for each offence.
(c) Residents will not tamper with or damage the electrical and sanitary installations. The cost of
repairs/ replacement due to any damage done to them, will be realized from the resident/s in
addition to fine which may be imposed by the Warden.

41. (a) Hostel fees will be charged from all the residents semester-wise (for six months at a time) in the
following installments :
(i) First Semester (on admission)
(ii) Second Semester (in January/start of Semester to end of last paper of examination of concerned
course)
(b) Residents getting admission to hostel at any time during the Semester-I/II will be charged full fee
for the Semester-I/II. All research scholars/fellows getting a fellowship will be treated at par with
other students.
(c) Securities (Hostel Mess and Canteen) will be refunded to a resident only after he/she has cleared
all the dues and properly handed over the possession of the room. Securities will not be adjusted
against the bills. Application for refund of securities along with a certificate from the Chairperson
regarding the date of leaving the Department/last date of examination and the hostel identity card
will be submitted three days before the intended date of leaving the hostel (when his/her mess/
canteen accounts will be closed and he/she will eat on cash payment). If need be the Security
Cheques can be sent by post by the Hostel Office after deducting postal and service charges.
(d) The students who take admission in the hostel but fail to take the possession of the Room, the
room rent will be deducted upto the period he informs to the Warden in writing. He will be given
refundable securities after deducting the charges pertaining to the minimum diet and Mess/
Canteen Charges etc. as per rules.

              THE SECURITIES WILL STAND LAPSED AFTER ONE YEAR OF LEAVING THE HOSTEL
                 
                          Hostel, Mess and Canteen Dues and Fines

42. Resolution of the Senate: All residents of the University Hostel shall be required to clear all dues
including the Hostel, mess and canteen charges on the 15th of the month, failing which they shall
be liable to disciplinary action. The Residents of the University Hostels shall not be granted fee
concession and/or paid monthly scholarship unless they clear their dues by the date indicated
above. Normally the fees will be collected without fine upto 15th of the month. However, the
students will have to pay Rs. 2/- per day for each bill in case of delay in paying the mess/canteen
charges and hostel charges after 15th. However, the total amount of fine will not exceed the 100%
of principal amount due to each bill. In case, dues are not cleared within 15 days from the last due
date, the students shall be liable to pay fine of Rs. 3/- per day per bill till the bills are paid.

43. IF THE LAST DATE OF PAYMENT IS A HOLIDAY, THEN THE FEE/CHARGES WILL BE
ACCEPTED WITHOUT FINE ON THE NEXTWORKING DAY.12

44. If the total amount of mess and canteen dues from a resident exceeds the security deposits to
mess and canteen on the 20th of the month, he/she will not be eligible for mess and canteen
services after 21st of the month.

45. Admission of a resident who fails to pay the dues for two consecutive months shall stand
cancelled and possession of the room shall be taken by the Warden and belongings removed to
the store without any liability.

46. All residents are required to clear their hostel, mess, canteen and other dues and obtain a no-dues
certificate before they take their examination roll numbers and again all their dues must be cleared
before they vacate the hostel, failing which their names will be forwarded to the Controller of
Examinations/Chairperson of the Department concerned for withholding the declaration of results/award of degree. Other disciplinary action, including forfeiture of their securities, may also
be taken.

47. Residents are required to pay hostel charges as printed in the Handbook of Rules.
A.

                                 HOSTEL FUND CHARGES SEMESTER-WISE
                                 ---------------------------------
Rent (Not to be charged from SC/ST students, Rs. 360/- Per Semester
vide Syndicate para 5, dated 9.12.1992)
Water Charges
(If the bill is higher it will be distributed equally Rs. 360/- Per Semester
amongst the residents of hostel/s)
Electricity Charges
(If the bill is higher it will be distributed equally Rs. 2500/- Per Semester
amongst the residents of hostel/s)
Development Fund Rs. 750/- Per Semester
Routine Hostel Maintenance Charges Rs. 1150/- Per Semester
Lift Charges (wherever facility is available) Rs. 300/- Per Semester
TOTAL (with lift charges) Rs. 5420/-Per Semester
TOTAL (without lift charges) Rs. 5120/-Per Semester
MESS FUND CHARGES SEMESTER-WISE
Foods Subsidy Rs. 360/- Per Semester
Mess Canteen Servant Welfare Charges Rs. 80/- Per Semester
Poor Student Welfare Fund (Hostel Residents) Rs. 120/- Per Semester
Celebrations Funds Rs. 350/- Per Semester
TOTAL Rs. 910/- Per Semester
GRAND TOTAL (with lift charges) Rs. 6330/-Per Semester
GRAND (without lift charges) Rs. 6030/-Per Semester13
Note: 1. Out of Rs. 5000/- p.m. (consolidated) to be charged from the Research Scholars, Rs. 200/- p.m.
will be retained as mess fund charges for taking care of food subsidy, mess canteen servant
welfare charges, poor student welfare fund (Hostel residents), celebrations etc.; Rs. 500/- p.m.
will go to the Development Fund and the rest of the amount will be the income for running and
maintaining the hostels.
2. In case, a student shifts from one Department/branch to another, and is entitled for hostel accommodation in that Department/branch, his/her hostel fund and mess fund charges shall be adjusted. In case, a student does not vacate the room within 7 days of taking admission in the new
Department/branch, he/she will be liable to pay daily charges for the total stay in the earlier
hostel.
3. In case, a student shifts from one Department/branch to another, and is not entitled for hostel
accommodation in that Department/branch, he/she shall have to vacate the hostel within 7 days
positively and his/her hostel fund and mess fund charges shall be refunded by considering the
total stay in the hostel on daily charges. After deducting the daily charges amount, rest of the
payment can be refunded.
4. In case, a student leaves the University, his/her hostel fund and mess fund charges shall be
refunded by considering the total stay in the hostel on daily charges. After deducting the daily
charges amount, rest of the payment can be refunded.
5. The student must apply for refund within one month of vacating the hostel room.
B. OPTIONAL CHARGES (To be charged semester-wise):
1 Scooter/Motorcycle parking charges Rs. 70 p.m.
Car Parking Charges (subject to availability) Rs. 500 p.m.
(No new four wheeler will is allowed in hostels as per Senate decision. Only already registered
vehicle will be allowed with one time advance payment for the whole semester.)
2 Additional Facility Charges :
Desert cooler Rs. 300 p.m.
Laundry Charges (where facility of Rs. 25 p.m.
Washing machines provided)
Electrical Kettle Charges Rs. 75 p.m.
Hair Ironing/Hair Dryer Device Rs. 25 p.m. each
C. REFUNDABLE SECURITIES
Hostel Rs. 1000
Mess Rs. 1800
(Mess Security in case Co-op. Mess) Rs. 2000
Canteen Rs. 1200
BELOW: -
Price of Hand Book of Rules Rs. 75/-
Fine for smoking Rs. 500/-
Fine for possession of any weapon Rs. 2000/-
Fine for any vehicle found parked inside the Rs. 500/- per default
hostel building.
Guest charges maximum for 3 days (in resident's Rs. 25/- per day
room only)
Fee for continuation Rs. 50/- per day
Advance for being a member of Co-operative Rs. 2000/-
Mess to be adjusted against last bill
Surcharge on Guest diets Rs. 5/- per diet
Group of students staying in hostel from outstation Rs. 50/- per head per night
Charges for enrolled research scholars not Rs. 50 per day (1 to 3 months) and Rs. 80
confirming registration within two years pay per day (beyond 3 months)
Cloak room charges Rs. 50/- per day for group of 4 students
Charges for reissuing a time barred cheque to the Rs. 100/-
 residents
Note: 1. Any guest staying more than 15 days in the hostel will have to pay electricity charges in
addition to daily charges.
2. Twenty five per cent (25%) of Daily Charges will go in Development Fund of the Hostel.
Important Note:-
E. The hostel rent will be charged as shown against each category:
Category of Students Type of rent to be charged
1. Regular Campus Students Normal Rate
2. (i) Registered/Enrolled Research Scholar: Normal Rate
(Not entitled for House rent)
(ii) Registered/Enrolled Research Scholars : to pay the amount as per
(Entitled for House rent) entitlement
F. General Rules for maximum total period of stay in Panjab University Hostel/s:
The total maximum period of stay for any student in Panjab University hostel/s from the date of
admission/enrolment to the Department shall be as under:
1. Masters Course - 2 Years15
2. LL.B. - 3 Years
3. B.A./B.Com. LL.B. (H.S.) - 5 Years
4. LL.M. (one year)* - 1-1/4 Years
5. LL.M. (two year)* - 2-1/4 Years
6. B.E. - 4 Years
7. M.E. & M.Tech.* - 2-1/4 Years
8. M.Sc. (H.S.) - 2 Years
9. B.Sc. (H.S.) - 3 Years
10. B. Pharmacy - 4 Years
11. M. Pharmacy - 2 Years
12. MCA - 3 Years
13. BDS - 4-1/2 Years
14. MDS - 3 Years
15. M.Phil - 1 Year
(Note: *for the period ¼ months i.e. 3 months, normal rent will be charged)
13. Ph.D. - Upto Four Years - (8 Semesters Charges): Normal Rent
Next 6 months* (one semester) - Normal Rent (JRF/SRF & Non JRF)
Next 6 months*(one semester) - Normal Rent (JRF/SRF) & Continuation Charges for Non JRF.
(*after 4 years recommendations of supervisor and approval of grant of extension in the Ph.D.
programme by the competent body/authority will be mandatory)
Ph.D students: More than 5 years stay will be considered as over-stay and will be charged @ Rs.
80 per day.
G. Eligible Blind Students for Degree and Post-Graduate Degree Courses shall be provided free
accommodation in the University Hostels, but they will have to pay mess/canteen charges and all
refundable securities.
H. For regular campus students, semester will mean from 1st July to 31st December, and 1st January
to 30th June & for Research Scholars, Semester will start from date of enrolment.
I. Research Scholars will be given provisional accommodation from date of approval by the Department. However, they are required to submit enrolment letter within 6 months. They are required
to clear Pre-Ph.d course work and submit synopsis within 2 years.
J. Each student is required to pay for full semester (part-payment is not allowed).
K. In case of delay in fellowship for Research Scholars, their fine will be waived-off to the extent of
100% by the DSW.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



                                        IMPORTANT TELEPHONE NUMBERS
                                        ---------------------------
Designation Contact Numbers
Dean of University Instruction 2541156, 4292
Dean Student Welfare 2541596, 7087033309
Dean Student Welfare (W) 2541596, 7087033310, 4573
Assistant Registrar (DSW) 2541176, 4570
Health Centre Office/Reception 2541722 4475, 4476
Panjab University Enquiry 2534817 4817, 4818, 4819
Chief of University Security 2771170, 4891, 4289, 616420

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                      