A hostel is a home away from home.
Aware of the special needs and requirements of students, who come from far-flung places to this centre of learning, the Panjab University tries to provide them a safe, secure and affordable accommodation.

There are eight Residence Halls for students on the campus, 4 each for boys and 4 for girls. 
These Halls, which accommodate more than 3000 students, are named after eminent men and women, historical personalities and personages: Mehar Chand Mahajan, G.C. Chatterji, Shanti Swaroop Bhatnagar, Vallabh Bhai Patel, Lala Lajpat Rai, Justice Teja Singh Samundari, Swami Vivekananda, Baba Banda Singh Bahadur, Mata Gujri, Laxmi Bai, Sarojini Naidu, Kasturba Gandhi, Savitri Bai Phule, Mother Teresa, Bebe Nanaki, Florence Nightingale and Amrita Pritam who played an important role in shaping the destiny of world and left footprints on the sands of time.

The University Hostels take pains to give its students a neat and clean environment and a comfortable place to live in. 
There are Wardens/Hostel Staff on duty round the clock. 
Each hostel has a dining hall and canteen, several desert and water coolers, a visitors' lounge, and invariably an outdoor court for badminton, volley ball etc. 
The mess provides a balanced diet at reasonable rates. 
The Common Room is fairly well equipped with current magazines and newspapers. 
There is provision for indoor games, LCD TV and music system. 
Internet connectivity through wi-fi and cybre cafes been provided in each hostel.

Architecturally, the hostels are aesthetically laid out with plenty of open space and a lot of greenery. 
The rooms are comfortable, fitted with fan, lights and hard furniture. 
Each wing of the hostel has several verandahs and balconies.

Comforts are important but they are not enough. 
Man is a social animal and needs to interact with others. 
The resident students are encouraged to participate in cultural and social activities. 
Colourful evenings of song and dance are not unusual on the campus. 
Talent shows, dramatics and literary events are organized from time to time. 
The inmates of a hostel are encouraged to live in harmony, like one big family, lending each other a helping hand whenever required, mutually cooperating to make hostel life a rich and fruitful experience.

There is no doubt that during these formative years in the hostel, life-long bonds are created and friendships cemented. 
This is a time, which will stand out in the memory as a golden period. 
University experience is an important milestone in an individual's life, the stepping-stone to an adult life of responsibility and care. 
The hostels of Panjab University try to provide an ideal atmosphere for a healthy, all round development of personality and a launching pad for a glorious career ahead.

Living in a hostel presupposes high degree of integrity, consciousness, cooperation, tolerance and hard work for a bright future and good image of our institution.